.TH "SWAP" "8" "November 2016" "sysadminScripts" "System Management Commands"

.SH "NAME"
swap \- Enable or disable swapspaces

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B swap 
\-l [\-v] [\-u]
.sp
.B swap
\-e \-f swapfile [\-s sizeM | sizeG] [\-p]
.sp
.B swap
\-d \-f swapfile [\-r] [\-p]


.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The 
.B swap 
command can be used to enable and disable swapspaces.

The 
.B \-e
option indicates that a swapspace should be activated. The name of
the swapspace is given with the
.B \-f
option. If the given swapspace is not
found in the system, the swapspace will be created with a default
size of 500M. The default size can be overwriten with the
.B \-s
option. Swap only accepts 
.B / 
and 
.B /var/tmp 
as locations for swapspaces. The activated swapspaces are only
temporary changes to the system. The 
.B \-p
option can be used to make the change permanent.
.sp

The 
.B \-d 
option defines that the swapspace indicated by the
.B \-f 
option should be deactivated. When the
.B \-r 
option is given, the actual swapfile is removed
from the system. Again, with the 
.B \-p 
option the change is permantently applied to the
system. The 
.B \-r 
option implies that the 
.B \-p 
option is also given.

.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
.BR \-d , "  \-\-disable"
Disable a swapspace. The name of the swapspace is defined
by the
.B \-f
option.

.TP
.BR \-e , "  \-\-enable"
Enable a swapspace. The name of the swapspace to
be activated has to be given with the
.B \-f
option.
.TP

.BR \-f , "  \-\-file  " \fIname\fR
Define swapspace name. \fIname\fR should be a full path
and can only be in / (root) and /var/tmp. While it is
technically possible to place \fIname\fR in almost any 
directory, swap only accepts / and /var/tmp as valid
locations.

If \fIname\fR does not exists
.B swap
will create the file with a default size of 500M. This
default can be overwritten with the
.B \-s
option.

.TP
.B \-h , "  \-\-help"
Show help.

.TP
.BR \-l , "  \-\-list"
Show current swap confguration. The following information 
is part of the 
.B \-l 
report: swapon -c , /etc/fstab , free

The 
.B \-v
option adds vmstat output.  See the
.B \-v
option for more information.

.TP
.BR \-p ,  "  \-\-permanent"
Make changes permanent. This options applies to both the
.B \-e
and 
.B \-d
options.

.TP
.BR \-r , "  \-\-remove"
Remove actual swapspace file. Only applicable with the
.B \-d
option and swapspaces that are regular files. Swapdevices
cannot be removed but they can still be disabled. 

The 
.B \-d
option implies that the 
.B \-p option 
is enabled as well. There is no sense in 
removing the actual swapspace file but still reference
it from /etc/fstab.

.TP
.BR \-s , "  \-\-size"
Size of swapspace. This option only applies to swapspaces
that do not exist and that will be created by
swap. It will \fInot\fR adjust the size of existing swapspaces.

The size can given in Megabytes or Gigabytes use the M or
G indicator. e.g. 500M equals 500Megabytes, 1G equals
1Gigabyte. The indicator has to be in capital.

.TP
.BR \-u , "  \-\-utilization"
Add 10 lines of sar output to the report. This option is
only valid with the
.B \-l
option.


.TP
.BR \-v , "  \-\-verbose"
Add 10 lines of vmstat output to the report. This option is 
only valid with the 
.B \-l
option.

.SH "EXAMPLES"
List the basic swap configuration.

      # swap -l

List swap configuration with current statistics.

      # swap -l -v

List swap configuration with current utilization.

      # swap -l -u

Temporarily enable /var/tmp/swapfile as swapdevice. If file does not 
exist, it will be created with 500M as default size.

      # swap -e -f /var/tmp/swapfile

Permanently enable /var/tmp/swapfile. 

      # swap -e -f /var/tmp/swapfile -p

Enable /var/tmp/swapfile with size 1024M. (file does not exist).

      # swap -e -f /var/tmp/swapfile -s 1024M

Like previous command but now make the change permanent

      # swap -e -f /var/tmp/swapfile -s 1024M -p

Temporarily disable a swapspwace

      # swap -d -f /var/tmp/swapfile

Permanently disable a swapspace

      # swap -d -f /var/tmp/swapfile -p

Remove the swapfile after disabling it

      # swap -d -f /var/tmp/swapfile -r

.SH "BUGS"
Probably available but swap was not heavily tested so none
where found yet.

.SH "AUTHOR"
Written by Peter A. van Gemert.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR free (1),
.BR fstab (5),
.BR mkswap (8),
.BR swapoff (8),
.BR swapon (8),
.BR vmstat (8)

